---
sidebar_position: 10
---

# Appendix: Examples

This appendix provides brief summaries of a few open projects --
largely open-source projects -- that exemplify a topic or
recommendation covered in this paper, or that were interesting
projects and products in some way.  Not all are DPGs.

### Open Source and Collaboration : Canada's Covid Exposure Notifications Mobile App

The Canadian Digital Service (CDS) is a centralized resource for the
federal Canadian government that builds tools, technologies and
processes that can be (re)used across agencies, with the goal of
improving public services. Their products [are developed under
open-source
models](https://digital.canada.ca/2020/02/24/why-open-source-matters)
and freely available on GitHub. **All are licensed under the common
MIT license in order to encourage broad collaboration and greater
reusability across potential open -- or proprietary -- downstream
projects.**

When the Covid-19 pandemic hit, the **CDS's familiarity with open
source enabled them to quickly bring in private partners, such as
Shopify, Blackberry, and the non-profit consortium the Linux
Foundation, and work across multiple government agencies** to create a
[mobile
app](https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/coronavirus-disease-covid-19/covid-alert.html#a10)
that notifies people who might have been exposed to the virus. The
core of the contract tracing app was formed around the set of
privacy-protecting open standards and APIs for exposure notification
that were jointly created by Google and Apple. Open APIs for the
web-based results portal gave local governments flexibility in how
they choose to support Covid-positive users in sharing their status in
a privacy-preserving way. **The [Linux Foundation Public Health](https://www.lfph.io/) managed
an open and public security audit.**

### SORMAS

Developed by a consortium of German and Nigerian public health
research institutions, [SORMAS](https://sormas.org/) is software for
managing and controlling epidemic outbreaks.  It is used extensively
in response to Ebola outbreaks in multiple countries.

### Lutece

The [Lutece government services portal](https://www.lutece.paris.fr/) was
developed by the city of Paris, France and has recently become the
subject of international attention, as they make greater efforts to
support multi-jurisdictional adoption.

### VITAM

[VITAM](https://www.programmevitam.fr/) is an open-source project used
throughout France by jurisdictions and private companies to manage
archiving of government documents.

### Open Data and Standards: Open Referral API

Every government struggles to connect individual citizens
with the vast array of social services they might need.  Few people
need help from just one program or agency.  Governments often rely on social
work specialists to know all the options and help people navigate
bureaucracies.  Those specialists need tools to help them keep track
of those options-- often something as simple as knowing whether a
program is taking new cases can be difficult.  [Open
Referral](https://openreferral.org/) is a project that allows
aggregators of such information to share it in common ways and to
support such tools.

Open Referral publishes an API [Open Referral Human Services Data API
(HSDA)](https://github.com/openreferral/api-specification) and related
open-source tools to support their mission.  More importantly, they've
engaged in several years of advocacy to spur adoption into existing
solutions and by a variety of governments and agencies.  **Open Referral
is a prime example of how open APIs mixed with a little technology and
backed by policy engagement can power tools that ensure government
services have impact**.

### Policy : Estonia's E-Government Services

Estonia is famous for its pioneering work in [digitizing almost all
government services](https://e-estonia.com/) in order to build more
trust and efficiency across its society. The country is also widely
admired for its **[integrated use of national policy
guidance](https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/165711456838073531-0050022016/original/WDR16BPEstonianeGovecosystemVassil.pdf),
direct investment and economic development policy, regulation, and
even foreign policy to drive and support development of the necessary
open IT infrastructure.**

Estonia's earliest guidance focused on how to efficiently build
interoperable infrastructure that was thoughtfully user-centric. Open
standards for interoperability, use of open-source solutions and
attention to privacy were key points of guidance. Most of Estonia's
e-services software is now open-source. The government eventually
created an [e-state code repository for its
software](https://koodivaramu.eesti.ee/users/sign_in):
koodivaramu.eesti.ee (based on open-source GitLab). It's notable that
this code repository was created by the Ministry of Economic Affairs
as well as the Information Systems Authority, as **a key goal of the
government's use of open source -- as well as of open data, available
through [the Open Government Data Portal](https://avaandmed.eesti.ee/)
-- is to encourage the private sector to also develop commecial or
non-commercial services using the same common infrastructure**.

In recent years, **Estonia has used its open approach to software
development and data to its advantage in working across
borders**. Estonia recognized that many of its e-services -- such as
digital identity and e-signatures -- need to function across national
boundaries and that its regional neighbors would benefit from
collaborating on common digital infrastructure useful to each
state. In 2017, it founded the Nordic Digital Infrastructure Institute
to help govern and foster the joint development of basic e-service
infrastructure across regional partners. Estonia, Finland and Iceland
are members. Estonia moved the governance of X-Road, its open-source
data exchange software that powers much of its government
e-services, to this new organization, along with a few other
components. X-Road is under an MIT license, but the trademark is
still held by the Estonian government, giving them the essential tool
for protecting trust in the technology.

**Estonia planned thoughtfully for how their policies should
specifically support their open technology approach**. For example,
Estonia's Public Information Act prohibits government agencies from
creating separate databases to collect and store the same data, and
it's actually illegal for new public e-services to design systems that
store the same data in different repositories. In combination with the
creation of X-Road data exchange platform, this integrated approach
drives remarkable efficiency as well as data security and protection.

In June 2021, **Estonia also began [enforcing
legislation](https://www.riigiteataja.ee/akt/122052021002) that
requires state software source code be made available in the e-state
code repository, free to the public**, with limited exceptions.

### Policy: Singapore 

The **Republic of Singapore has thoughtfully engaged private
industry** to spur greater innovation and help deliver digitized
government services more broadly and quickly.

For example, [Singapore partnered with private
industry](https://media.un.org/en/asset/k17/k17a9bg6o8) to provide
subsidized, affordable mobile plans for seniors.  This helped remove
one barrier to this vulnerable population's use of Singapore's digital
services -- such as the Singapore Financial Data Exchange (SGFinDex),
which aims to help citizens with financial planning, among other
things.

In 2017, the Government Technology Agency of Singapore (GovTech)
launched APEX, a centralised data exchange platform that helps
agencies share data amongst themselves and with private companies
through a published set of **open
[APIs](https://www.developer.tech.gov.sg/technologies/data-and-apis/apex)**.

Along with APEX, the core of Singapore's digitization strategy rests
in its national digital identity platform, called
[SingPass](https://www.singpass.gov.sg/main).  SingPass gives citizens
access to over 1,700 digital services.  [Over 70% of Singapore
residents rely on the
service](https://media.un.org/en/asset/k17/k17a9bg6o8), which is
supported by an array of [open
APIS](https://www.singpass.gov.sg/main/businesses) that help private
industry (and other government agencies) leverage common
infrastructure for things like identity verification and document
signing. For example, Grab -- a 'super app' that helps users order
food, book hotels, find rides, get groceries delivered, and more --
relies on [SingPass's MyInfo digital identity
profile](https://www.grab.com/sg/press/tech-product/grab-creates-safer-more-secure-grabpay-e-wallet-with-new-user-verification-feature/)
for user verification.

**Singapore was one of the first governments to deliver a
community-driven, mobile COVID contact-tracing app**, pioneering the
use of Bluetooth wireless communication in this space. The government
open-sourced their reference implementation of the BlueTrace protocol,
[OpenTrace](https://github.com/OpenTrace-community).


[Singapore works to harmonize ICT regulation, help regional businesses
reach wider audiences, and strengthen the regional digital
economy](https://media.un.org/en/asset/k17/k17a9bg6o8) through
bilateral digital economy agreements (e.g. [cybersecurity
agreements](https://ccdcoe.org/incyder-articles/asean-cyber-developments-centre-of-excellence-for-singapore-cybercrime-convention-for-the-philippines-and-an-open-ended-working-group-for-everyone/)
with Australia, Canada, Estonia, France, Germany, India, Japan, the
Netherlands, the UK and the US) and regional mechanisms, such as the
ASEAN data management framework and the ASEAN model contractual
clauses for cross border data flows.


### Open Source Readiness : United States Web Design System

A recommendation in evaluating Open Source Readiness -- and in moving
up the 'readiness ladder' -- is to **look for places where
collaboration through open-source co-development could address common
problems through small-scale, low-risk and even experimental
engagements. Solving common problems can drive quick efficiencies and
financial savings and build goodwill for greater collaboration.**
These are often most easily identified at the inter-departmental
level, but inter-agency level issues are also candidates if there are
well established relationships that would support collaboration
(although clear and trusted leadership is also a requirement,
especially if such collaboration is new) and if it seems an early
success could be gained without a deep investment.

An example of a successful "low fruit, high shared reward" approach is
the [United States Web Design
System](https://designsystem.digital.gov/) (USWDS).  (Infrastructure
for web site development and management has often been an area of
early open-source DPG collaboration). This [open-source design
system](https://github.com/uswds) helps federal agencies build
accessible, mobile-friendly websites and saves significant time and
effort. Not all of the thousands of web sites managed by over 400 US
federal agencies need different forms, buttons and search bars!  USWDS
was an early open-source project across seven federal agencies, including 18F
and Digital Government Services. A shared [open-source web analytics
solution](https://analytics.usa.gov/) was published around the same
time. **The reliance on open-source development and attention to
community development has fostered vibrant participation from hundreds
of government employees across agencies as well as volunteers from
non-profit organizations, like Code for America.**

### Product: Checkbook NYC

The city of New York operates an open-source financial transparency
application called [Checkbook
NYC](https://www.checkbooknyc.com/spending_landing/yeartype/B/year/123).
It allows citizens, journalists, and government contractors to see
payments made by the city to vendors.  People use it to understand
government spending, and also to collect data for analysis of
opportunities for government contracts.  Subcontractors use it to know
when their prime contractor has been paid, so they know when they are
owed payment.  Journalists use it to root out corruption and write
about policy.  Researchers use it to track government activity.

A couple years after New York deployed its site, a Travis County,
Texas, deployed Checkbook NYC to provide similar transparency to its
citizens.  They've bundled it as a [Vendor Payment
Details](https://financialtransparency.traviscountytx.gov/VPD)
application into a broader financial transparency site.

**Checkbook NYC is a good example of how open source can take
investments by larger jurisdictions and more-resources governments and
create benefits that can be used by jurisdictions who might not take
up tool-making on a large scale themselves**.


### Product: GeoNode

When the World Bank considered its mission and the mapping tools
available to support decision-making by governments, it realized there
was a gap in the ecosystem.  Existing, entrenched vendors were not
meeting all the mapping needs of civil society organizations.  Their
tools were also prohibitively expensive.  The World Bank kick-started an
open-source project to fill the gap and lower prices and later successfully
transitioned that effort to a community of organizations that took up
development.  Vendors joined the ecosystem to support the product.
Other open-source efforts arose to interoperate
(e.g. [QGIS](https://qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html)).  The
entire GIS sector enjoys much more open-source support than it did
before.

Today, various tools from the original GeoNode codebase have migrated
to other projects, been integrated in proprietary tools from new
vendors (chiefly BoundlessGeo), and are all available at significantly
lower cost than before. Overall, World Bank's GeoNode investment in
open source is a realistic take of success at using open source to
achieve goals in a sustainable way.  The work demonstrates that
**open-source investment can create many different types of outcomes**.

For an analysis of GeoNode's open-source work, please see [A Case
Study On Institutional Investments In Open
Source](https://opendri.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/OpenDRI-and-GeoNode-a-Case-Study-on-Institutional-Investments-in-Open-Source.pdf).


### Product: SORMAS

[SORMAS](https://sormas.org/) (Surveillance Outbreak Response
Management & Analysis System) is an open-source, mobile health
platform that supports "[the collection, organisation and analysis of
real-time data for both disease surveillance and outbreak response,
and has been designed specifically to operate in resource-poor
settings](https://health.bmz.de/wp-content/uploads/studies/GHPC_SORMAS_full_version_final.pdf)."
It was created to address the West African Ebola outbreak in 2014/15
through a public-private partnership between German and Nigerian
public health and research institutions and a private software
company.

SORMAS was originally created in a closed model but ultimately moved
to open source in 2016. The reasons behind the project's move to open
source underscores its benefits: **[making sure the product remained
free from vendor lock-in; enabling faster adoption to different needs,
including advances in surveillance and outbreak management; able to
more easily integrate and interoperate with emerging digital health
ecosystems; and fostering collaboration between developers,
epidemiologists and other health specialists to further develop and
maintain the
product](https://health.bmz.de/wp-content/uploads/studies/GHPC_SORMAS_full_version_final.pdf)**.
This is exactly what's happened: SORMAS's original process models were
quickly adopted to include [monkeypox, cerebrospinal meningitis, Lassa
fever and measles (this work done in Nigeria 2017-2018, which rolled
out a model for monkeypox in *14 days*) and again to new COVID-19
coronavirus in
2020](https://health.bmz.de/wp-content/uploads/studies/GHPC_SORMAS_full_version_final.pdf).
It now [covers 19 infectious diseases](https://sormas.org/faq).
Original deployments were in Ghana and Nigera; Switzerland, France,
Germany and Fiji implemented SORMAS during the pandemic; and
[Afghanistan, Nepal, Burkina Faso and Côte
d'Ivoire](https://sormas.org/faq) are preparing for deployments.
SORMAS [interoperates with District Health Information Software 2
(DHIS2) and aligns with other popular digital platforms in the region,
such as the electronic IDSR system and Epi
Info](https://health.bmz.de/wp-content/uploads/studies/GHPC_SORMAS_full_version_final.pdf).
It's also a Digital Square-approved global good.
